add wpep 0008 (#7)
wazo-platform/wpep: wpep0008.md

integration tests.

## Motivation

The integration test framework was implemented in Wazo before the usage of
pytest. Pytest offers a very Pythonic way to organize tests and fixtures, and we
want to use this system more and more, since it offers more flexibility,
readability, performance and reusability.

## State of the art in Wazo Platform

Integration tests are organised around `AssetLaunchingTestCase`, inheriting from
the `unittest` testing framework. This organization forces tests to be organized
around a test class, which may not be as flexible as we want.

Here is an example:

```python
# helpers/base.py
class BaseAssetLaunchingTestCase(AssetLaunchingTestCase):

    assets_root = os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__file__), '../..', 'assets')
    asset = 'base'
    service = 'agid'

    @classmethod
    def make_agid(cls):
        port = cls.service_port(4573, 'agid')
        return AgidClient('127.0.0.1', port)

class IntegrationTest(unittest.TestCase):
    asset_cls = BaseAssetLaunchingTestCase
    agid: AgidClient

    @classmethod
    def setUpClass(cls):
        cls.agid = cls.asset_cls.make_agid()

# conftest.py
from .helpers import base as asset

> def pytest_collection_modifyitems(session, config, items):
>     item.parent.own_markers[0].args[0])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
def pytest_collection_modifyitems(session, config, items):
    item.parent.own_markers[0].args[0]
```
What does this do?

Reviewer 2: Sorry, I incorrectly copied that line. It should have been:
```python
items.sort(key=lambda item: item.parent.own_markers[0].args[0])
```
It seems to be a hack to sort the tests by asset name to ensure they are executed in order. However, when using actual pytest fixtures and not classes this hack is not needed as pytest already groups tests by fixtures and cleans up afterwards.
See here: https://github.com/wazo-platform/wazo-agid/commit/72adb42a1b291a4fa55dca8934e7d8e94280f766#diff-32c58fab06dc497f629f865913a96478cb7e794619b3ff692940660df044b98aL8

Author: Code updated.

| Key | Value |
| ---: | :--- |
| **Title** | Wazo integration tests framework |
| **Number** | 0008 |
| **Date** | 2023-08-28 |
| **Authors** | Jesse Sopel <jesse.sopel@wazo.io>, Sebastien Duthil <sduthil@wazo.io> |
| **Status** | draft |

## Abstract

> Wazo integration tests: Explicit the direction of evolution of integration tests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make explicit the direction of evolution of integration tests towards a more pytest-oriented paradigm.
```

Reviewer 2: Make explicit the desire to migrate towards a more pytest-oriented paradigm in integration tests. ?

Reviewer 2: For example, with the TestCase format:

```python
# helpers/base.py
class BaseAssetLaunchingTestCase(AssetLaunchingTestCase):

    assets_root = os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__file__), '../..', 'assets')
    asset = 'base'
    service = 'agid'

    @classmethod
    def make_agid(cls):
        port = cls.service_port(4573, 'agid')
        return AgidClient('127.0.0.1', port)

class IntegrationTest(unittest.TestCase):
    asset_cls = BaseAssetLaunchingTestCase
    agid: AgidClient

    @classmethod
    def setUpClass(cls):
        cls.agid = cls.asset_cls.make_agid()

# conftest.py
from .helpers import base as asset

def pytest_collection_modifyitems(session, config, items):
    item.parent.own_markers[0].args[0])

@pytest.fixture(scope='session')
def base():
    asset.BaseAssetLaunchingTestCase.setUpClass()
    try:
        yield
    finally:
        asset.BaseAssetLaunchingTestCase.tearDownClass()

# test_handlers.py
@use_asset('base')
class TestHandlers(IntegrationTest):
    def test_monitoring(self):
        recv_vars, recv_cmds = self.agid.monitoring()
        assert recv_cmds['Status'] == 'OK'
```

Could be converted to:
```python
# helpers/base.py
class BaseAssetLaunchingHelper(AbstractAssetLaunchingHelper):
    assets_root = Path(__file__).parents[2] / 'assets'
    asset = 'base'
    service = 'agid'

    @cached_class_property
    def agid(cls) -> AgidClient:
        port = cls.service_port(4573, 'agid')
        return AgidClient('127.0.0.1', port)

# conftest.py
@pytest.fixture(scope='session')
def base_asset() -> Generator[BaseAssetLaunchingHelper, None, None]:
    yield from make_asset_fixture(BaseAssetLaunchingHelper)

# test_handlers.py
def test_monitoring(base_asset: BaseAssetLaunchingHelper) -> None:
    recv_vars, recv_cmds = base_asset.agid.monitoring()
    assert recv_cmds['Status'] == 'OK'
```

## Motivation

The integration test framework was implemented in Wazo before the usage of
pytest. Pytest offers a very Pythonic way to organize tests and fixtures, and we
want to use this system more and more, since it offers more flexibility,
readability, performance and reusability.

## State of the art in Wazo Platform

Integration tests are organised around `AssetLaunchingTestCase`, inheriting from
the `unittest` testing framework. This organization forces tests to be organized

> around a test class, which may not be as flexible as we want.

Reviewer: A minimal example of such a typical test case would be nice(with some setUp/teardown) to make things explicit.

Author: I added the example provided by Jesse below.

## Rejected propositions

* None, this proposition emerged from a refactor proposition that looked promising.

## Proposition

* Migrate all Wazo Platform projects to Pytest (looking at you wazo-confd!)
* Use Pytest fixtures system as much as possible for organizing tests and fixtures.

The `AssetLaunchingTestCase` class [was
refactored](https://github.com/wazo-platform/wazo-test-helpers/pull/89) to be
usable in more Pytest friendly patterns, while keeping retrocompatibility with

> the former style of tests.

Reviewer: Could be more specific on what such a migration would involve, such as including an example of what a good pytest-oriented test case would look like and how a typical unittest-based test case could be converted to a pytest-based one.

Reviewer: (I guess simplifying the agid PR to an essential self-contained example that demonstrates some aspects of the new AssetLaunchingTestCase version)

Reviewer 2: The only major changes were to split out the logic into another class so we didn't have to create a TestCase that extends from the test helper. The decorator was just a helper to make it easier to work with the unusual class level behavior of this class.

If this is the direction we are going. It might be nice to plan to eventually migrate away from said class level usage of attributes in `AssetLaunchingTestCase`? It might be a good idea to look into as it would allow us to simply use functools.cached_property instead of the Descriptor I had to write.

Reviewer 2: Also, it should be "while keeping backwards-compatible with"

## Example

An example implementation using more Pytest-oriented patterns can be read in
[wazo-agid](https://github.com/wazo-platform/wazo-agid/pull/127/files).

## Implementations

A more Pytest-oriented style has been used in two repos to date:

> 

Reviewer: doesn't wazo-calld also uses mostly pytest-oriented integration tests?

Author: No, I don't see any pytest-based fixture in wazo-calld, and all tests rely on the `AssetLaunchingTestCase`.

Reviewer: My bad, it's confd that I saw was using pytest:
https://github.com/wazo-platform/wazo-confd/blob/master/integration_tests/suite/base/test_agent_skill.py

* [wazo-agid](https://github.com/wazo-platform/wazo-agid/pull/127/files)

> * [wazo-sms](https://github.com/wazo-communication/wazo-sms/pull/9)

Reviewer 2: The latter example is not in a public repo. Should we include a link here?

Author: Very true, removing the link.
